 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy  
Physical informed neural network for SOH estimation of lithium-ion battery 
with electrochemical mechanism
Kai Gao a, Qi Li a
 , Lin Hu a,∗, Jing Huang b, Heng Li c
 ,∗, Yue Wu c
a College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, China
b College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410012, China
c School of Electronic Information, Central South University, Changsha 410004, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Lithium-ion batteries
State of health
Neural network
Electrochemical model
SEI layer
 A B S T R A C T
In recent years, Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising research approach 
for estimating the State of Health (SOH) of lithium-ion batteries. Compared to traditional purely data-driven 
methods, PINNs embed physical laws directly into the neural network’s loss function. This integration enhances 
predictive accuracy and generalization while ensuring physical consistency, thereby improving the model’s 
interpretability. Therefore, this study proposes a EM-PINN model based on the electrochemical degradation 
mechanism of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer growth. First, the battery capacity degradation process 
is modeled from the perspective of the electrochemical principles governing SEI layer growth, establishing 
explicit correlations between SEI layer growth kinetics and the rate of SOH degradation to form the physical 
constraints. Second, the EM-PINN framework is designed, incorporating the partial differential equation (PDE) 
loss, boundary condition loss, initial condition loss, and SOH physical loss to jointly guide the learning process 
of the model, thereby enhancing both its interpretability and prediction accuracy. Experimental validation on 
three public datasets (XJTU, MIT, and HUST) demonstrates that the proposed EM-PINN method achieves high-
accuracy SOH estimation across different datasets. Notably, across six testing scenarios with different data 
volumes, the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) reaches as low as 0.873%. This study provides a novel 
solution for integrating electrochemical mechanisms with PINN models for battery SOH estimation.
1. Introduction
The accelerating global energy transition [1] and pursuit of carbon 
neutrality [2] goals are profoundly reshaping transportation and energy 
systems. Electric vehicles (EVs), serving as the pivotal solution for 
greening the transportation sector, are being deployed on a large scale. 
Concurrently, Vehicle to Grid (V2G) technology [3,4] is emerging as a 
critical component for achieving deep synergy between the transporta-
tion and energy sectors. This innovative approach enables bidirectional 
energy flow, not only drawing power from the grid but also feeding 
stored energy from EV batteries back into it.
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) serve as fundamental energy storage 
units in EVs and V2G systems [5,6]. Their performance directly affect 
the driving range, safety, and service life of the vehicle, as well as the 
economic benefits and reliability of V2G participation. However, bat-
tery aging is an inevitable process. The SOH of the battery progressively 
degrades to failure under the influence of factors such as usage time [7], 
charge/discharge cycles [8], depth of discharge (DOD) [9], C-rate [10], 
and temperature [11]. Consequently, ensuring the safe, reliable, and 
∗ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: hulin@csust.edu.cn (L. Hu), huangjing926@hnu.edu.cn (J. Huang), liheng@csu.edu.cn (H. Li).
efficient operation of LIBs requires long-term condition monitoring 
(including SOH assessment [12]) and appropriate maintenance, both 
of which are crucial. As is well known, the SOH is quantified by the 
ratio of available capacity to initial capacity, and is employed as an 
essential indicator for assessing battery degradation [13].
Currently, SOH estimation methods for LIBs can be broadly catego-
rized into three types: physics-based models [14,15], data-driven [16–
18], and hybrid methods [19,20]. Among them, physics-based models 
typically employ multiphysics-coupled approaches to simulate inter-
nal degradation mechanisms and quantify battery degradation. For 
instance, Tang et al. [21] developed an electrochemical–thermal model 
incorporating loss of lithium inventory (LLI) and SEI layer growth to 
predict LIB capacity degradation. However, to more accurately char-
acterize the battery degradation process, Luo et al. [22] proposed 
an electrochemical–thermal–mechanical coupled model to characterize 
capacity degradation. This framework incorporates stress effects on 
degradation behavior and introduces temperature-dependent dynamic 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2025.139753
Received 9 November 2025; Received in revised form 5 December 2025; Accepted 20 December 2025
Energy 342 (2026) 139753 
Available online 20 December 2025 
0360-5442/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 